## Historical variation of herring contribution to the diet of predators in Puget Sound

Pacific herring (Clupea pallasii) are a foundational forage species in the Puget Sound, USA estuary and key prey for threatened salmon species. Puget Sound herring spawning stock biomass has been declining locally over the past 40 years. At present, there is little agreement on the primary cause of declines or the best management actions for recovery. Increases in adult herring mortality suggest predation on adults may be causing declines and/or limiting recovery. 

To evaluate whether changes in predation rates are related to herring declines, we analyzed the historical contribution of herring to the diet of a suite of Puget Sound predators including harbor seals, salmonids, seabirds, and piscivorous fish. We used a diet database that included 102 published diet analyses from Puget Sound, from between 1970 and 2016, in addition to raw datasets. We applied Generalized Additive Models (GAM) to analyze the spatiotemporal variation in the contribution of herring to the diet of predators in Puget Sound as a function of year, sampling location, predator species, predator size and ecological and oceanographic variables to identify forcing factors that could facilitate or limit stock recovery of Puget Sound herring. We found strong relationships of herring prey contribution with basin, year, salmonid abundance, herring spawning stock biomass and local-scale environmental indices and Pacific Ocean basin-scale indicators. Our results suggest that temporal and spatial variation in the contribution of herring to the diet of predators is strongly driven by changes in herring abundance and spawning biomass, and less by top-down predator dynamics. We found that the contribution of herring to the diet of predators varied by sub-basin suggesting that differences in environmental conditions and anthropogenic impacts between basins could be influencing herring availability to predators.

